[Docs] How to use cloud storage (#794)
canonical/k8s-snap: docs/src/snap/howto/storage/cloud.md

# How to use cloud storage

{{product}} simplifies the process of integrating and managing cloud storage
solutions like Amazon EBS. This guide provides steps to configure IAM policies,
deploy the cloud controller manager, and set up the necessary drivers for you
to take advantage of cloud storage solutions in the context of Kubernetes.

## What you'll need

This guide assumes the following:

- You have root or sudo access to an Amazon EC2 instance
- You can create roles and policies in AWS

> 

Reviewer: I suggest we say this is explicitly for AWS. In future we can use tabs to add Azure etc

        "elasticloadbalancing:DetachLoadBalancerFromSubnets",
        "elasticloadbalancing:DeregisterInstancesFromLoadBalancer",
        "elasticloadbalancing:ModifyLoadBalancerAttributes",
        "elasticloadbalancing:RegisterInstancesWithLoadBalancer",
        "elasticloadbalancing:SetLoadBalancerPoliciesForBackendServer",
        "elasticloadbalancing:AddTags",
        "elasticloadbalancing:CreateListener",
        "elasticloadbalancing:CreateTargetGroup",
        "elasticloadbalancing:DeleteListener",
        "elasticloadbalancing:DeleteTargetGroup",
        "elasticloadbalancing:DescribeListeners",
        "elasticloadbalancing:DescribeLoadBalancerPolicies",
        "elasticloadbalancing:DescribeTargetGroups",
        "elasticloadbalancing:DescribeTargetHealth",
        "elasticloadbalancing:ModifyListener",
        "elasticloadbalancing:ModifyTargetGroup",
        "elasticloadbalancing:RegisterTargets",
        "elasticloadbalancing:DeregisterTargets",
        "elasticloadbalancing:SetLoadBalancerPoliciesOfListener",
        "iam:CreateServiceLinkedRole",
        "kms:DescribeKey"
      ],
      "Resource": [
        "*"
      ]
    }
  ]
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can also include the commands to create a role, create these policies, attach these policies to that role and finally attach that role to an instance?

Reviewer 2: Or maybe not, we can argue that we shouldn't include aws commands in our docs for various reasons. 
Your choice tho, feel free to ignore this.

Author: I would rather leave that up to the user. I use the UI personally.

For a worker node:

```{dropdown} Worker Policies
```json
{
  "Version": "2012-10-17",
  "Statement": [
    {
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Action": [
        "ec2:DescribeInstances",
        "ec2:DescribeRegions",
        "ecr:GetAuthorizationToken",
        "ecr:BatchCheckLayerAvailability",
        "ecr:GetDownloadUrlForLayer",
        "ecr:GetRepositoryPolicy",
        "ecr:DescribeRepositories",
        "ecr:ListImages",
        "ecr:BatchGetImage"
      ],
      "Resource": "*"
    }
  ]
}
```

## Set your host name

The cloud controller manager uses the node name to correctly associate the node

> with an EC2 instance. In Canonical K8s, the node name is derived from the

Reviewer: {{product}}

hostname of the machine. Therefore, before bootstrapping the cluster, we must
first set an appropriate host name.

```bash
echo "$(sudo cloud-init query ds.meta_data.local-hostname)" | sudo tee /etc/hostname
```

> Then, reboot the machine.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can add the command here?

When the machine is up, use `hostname -f` to check the host name. It should
look like:

```bash
ip-172-31-11-86.us-east-2.compute.internal
```

This host name format is called IP-based naming and is specific to AWS.

```{note} Don't rely on the PS1 prompt to know if your host name was changed

> successfully. The PS1 prompt only displays the hostname up to the first `.`.

Reviewer 2: Nice! Advanced stuff :D TIL

```

> ## Bootstrap Canonical K8s

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Bootstrap {{product}}
```

Now that your machine has an appropriate host name, you are ready to bootstrap

> Canonical K8s.

Reviewer: you know what I am going to say...

First, create a bootstrap configuration file that sets the cloud-provider
configuration to "external".

```bash
echo "cluster-config:
  cloud-provider: external" > bootstrap-config.yaml
```

Then, bootstrap the cluster:

```bash
sudo k8s bootstrap --file ./bootstrap-config.yaml
sudo k8s status --wait-ready
```

## Deploy the cloud controller manager

> Now that you have an appropriate host name, policies, and a Canonical K8s

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you have an appropriate host name, policies, and a {{product}}
```

successfully deployed.

```bash
NAME                                 READY   STATUS    RESTARTS        AGE
aws-cloud-controller-manager-ndbtq   1/1     Running   1 (3h51m ago)   9h
```

## Deploy the EBS CSI Driver

Now that the cloud controller manager is deployed and can communicate with AWS,
you are ready to deploy the EBS CSI driver. The easiest way to deploy the
driver is with the Helm chart. Luckily, Canonical K8s has a built-in helm
command.

If you want to create encrypted drives, you need to add the statement to the
policy you are using for the instance.

```json
{
  "Effect": "Allow",
  "Action": [
      "kms:Decrypt",
      "kms:GenerateDataKeyWithoutPlaintext",
      "kms:CreateGrant"
  ],
  "Resource": "*"
}
```

Then, add the helm repo for the EBS CSI Driver.

```bash
sudo k8s helm repo add aws-ebs-csi-driver https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-ebs-csi-driver
sudo k8s helm repo update
```

Finally, install the Helm chart, making sure to set the correct region as an
argument.

```bash
sudo k8s helm upgrade --install aws-ebs-csi-driver \
    --namespace kube-system \
    aws-ebs-csi-driver/aws-ebs-csi-driver \

>     --set controller.region=us-east-2

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can put region as a template here like `<REGION>`

Author: Sure

ebs-csi-node-nx6rg                    3/3     Running   0               9h
```

The status of all pods should be "Running".

## Deploy a workload

Everything is in place for you to deploy a workload that dynamically creates
and uses an EBS volume.

First, create a StorageClass and a PersistentVolumeClaim:

```yaml
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1
kind: StorageClass
metadata:
  name: ebs-sc
provisioner: ebs.csi.aws.com
volumeBindingMode: WaitForFirstConsumer
parameters:
  type: gp3 # EBS volume type (gp3, gp2, etc.)
  fsType: ext4 # File system type
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: ebs-pvc
spec:
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 10Gi
  storageClassName: ebs-sc
```

Then, you can deploy a pod that uses a volume. Because we used
`WaitForFirstConsumer`, you'll only see the volume in AWS once the pod is
deployed.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: app-using-ebs
spec:
  containers:
  - name: app
    image: nginx
    volumeMounts:
    - mountPath: "/data"
      name: ebs-volume
  volumes:
  - name: ebs-volume
    persistentVolumeClaim:
      claimName: ebs-pvc

> ```

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can also show commands to create the StorageClass, PVC and the Pod.

Author: Not sure what you mean. Those objects are created by applying the YAML.

Reviewer 3: I think Hue was saying to include the apply yaml command?

first set an appropriate host name.

```bash
echo "$(sudo cloud-init query ds.meta_data.local-hostname)" | sudo tee /etc/hostname
```

Then, reboot the machine.

```bash
sudo reboot
```

When the machine is up, use `hostname -f` to check the host name. It should
look like:

```bash
ip-172-31-11-86.us-east-2.compute.internal
```

This host name format is called IP-based naming and is specific to AWS.

## Bootstrap {{product}}

Now that your machine has an appropriate host name, you are ready to bootstrap
{{product}}.

First, create a bootstrap configuration file that sets the cloud-provider
configuration to "external".

```bash
echo "cluster-config:
  cloud-provider: external" > bootstrap-config.yaml
```

Then, bootstrap the cluster:

```bash
sudo k8s bootstrap --file ./bootstrap-config.yaml
sudo k8s status --wait-ready
```

## Deploy the cloud controller manager

Now that you have an appropriate host name, policies, and a {{product}}
cluster, you have everything you need to deploy the cloud controller manager.

Here is a YAML definition file that sets appropriate defaults for you, it
configures the necessary service accounts, roles, and daemonsets:

> 

Reviewer 3: should you include a kubectl apply -f command to deploy the controller manager?

Author: Ah, that was an oversight on my part. Thanks.
